=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual - The central GTC documentation hub

=head1 INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the documentation of the Perl module I<Graphics::Toolkit::Color>.
It is an all in one solution to compute color sets, single colors,
handle color names and to convert and reformat color definitions.
This page gives you an overview where to find what information about this library.
If you do not find a needed information, please open a request of L<github|https://github.com/lichtkind/Graphics-Toolkit-Color>.

=head1 INDEX

The manual encompasses the following pages:

=over 4

=item *

Overviews

=over 4

=item *

L<Overview|Graphics::Toolkit::Color> - of the public API

=item *

L<CheatSheet|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::CheatSheet> - all methods, args and spaces on one page

=item *

L<Cookbook|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Cookbook> - code examples to solve real life problems

=back

=item *

Reference

=over 4

=item *

L<Constructor|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Constructor> - options to create a color object (color definitions)

=item *

L<Getter|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter> - methods that return not a color object

=item *

L<Calculation|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation> - methods that calculate one related color

=item *

L<Set|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set> - methods that calculate sets of colors

=item *

L<Argument|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument> - explaining all common arguments

=back

=item *

Topics 

=over 4

=item *

L<Name|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Name> - about color names

=item *

L<Space|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space> - detail info about color spaces

=item *

L<Format|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Format> - input and output formats

=item *

L<Error|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Error> - ways to do error handling

=item *

L<Plugin|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Plugin> - How to extend the library ?

=back

=back

=head1 GUIDE

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Graphics::Toolkit::Color, for short B<GTC>, is the top level API of this
release and the only package a regular user should be concerned with.
Its main purpose is the creation of related colors or sets of them,
such as gradients, complements and more. But if you want to convert, 
quantize, round or reformat color definitions, it can be helpful too.

GTC are read only, one color representing objects with no additional
dependencies. Create them in many different ways (see L</CONSTRUCTOR>).
Access its values via methods from section L</GETTER>.
Measure differences with the L</distance> method. L</SINGLE-COLOR>
methods create one new object that is related to the current one and
L</COLOR-SETS> methods will create a group of colors, that are not
only related to the current color but also have relations between each other.
Error messages will appear as return values instead of the expected result.

While this module can understand and output color values for many
L<color spaces|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space::Hub/COLOR-SPACES>,
L<RGB|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space::Hub/RGB>
is the (internal) primal one, because GTC is about colors that can be
shown on the screen, and these are usually encoded in I<RGB> (nonlinear standard RGB).
Humans access colors on hardware level (eye) in I<RGB>, on cognition level
in I<HSL> or I<LAB> (brain) and on cultural level (language) with names.
With all these options available you can express easily and intuitively
with which color to start. And plenty of functions with lots of options
help you to arrive at the desired color (palette) quickly.


=head1 CONSTRUCTOR

There are many ways to create a color object. In short you can either
use the name of a constant (see L</name>) or provide values, which are
coordinates in one of several
L<color spaces|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space::Hub/COLOR-SPACES>.
The latter are also understood in many
L<formats|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space::Hub/FORMATS>.
From now on any input that the constructor method C<new> accepts,
is called a B<color definition>.

=cut
