=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument - shape, content and meaning of reoccurring method arguments                                             

=head1 SYNOPSIS


See a condensed overview om the L<color spaces|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::CheatSheert>.

=head1 INTRODUCTION

L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Philosophy/>

Some named arguments of the above listed methods reappear in several methods.
Thus they are explained here in full detail once. Please note that you must
NOT wrap the named args in curly braces (HASH ref) but you may if you 
prefer to do so.


=head1 ARGUMENTS

=head2 in

I<in> expects a string with the name of a color space.
The options are currently: I<RGB>, I<LinearRGB>, I<CMY>, I<CMYK>, I<HSL>, 
I<HSV>, I<HSB>, I<HWB>, I<NCol>, I<YIQ>, I<YUV>, I<CIEXYZ>, I<CIELAB>, 
I<HunterLAB>, I<CIELUV>, I<CIELCHab>, I<CIELCHuv>, I<CIERGB>, I<AdobeRGB>,
I<AppleRGB>, I<ProPhotoRGB>, I<WideGamutRGB>, I<DisplayP3>, I<DisplayP3Linear>,
I<DCIP3>, I<DCIP3Linear>, I<Rec709>, I<Rec2020>, I<OKLAB>, I<OKLCH>, 
I<OKHSL>, I<OKHSV>, I<OKHWB>. If you want to know more about them, 
please read L<this page|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space>.
There you can also discover that many of them have an alias name that
is also acceptable: I<SRGB>, I<LinRGB>, I<YPbPr>, I<XYZ>, I<LAB>, I<LUV>,
I<LCH>, I<LCHuv>, I<opRGB>, I<ROMMRGB>, I<P3>, I<LinearDisplayP3>,
I<SMPTEP3>, I<LinearDCIP3>, I<BT709>, I<BT2020>. Please note that there
is a great degree of freedom with which a color space name can be written.
The user is free to use upper and lower case characters or to insert 
special characters for better readability, such as whitespace I<' '>, 
underscore I<'_'>, dash I<'-'> and dot I<'.'>.

The default color space for input and output is I<RGB>, but most
calculating methods default to I<OKLAB> or I<OKHSL> if a cylindrical
option is needed (I<complement>).

The argument I<in> is understood by all methods except I<new>, I<name> and I<closest_name>:
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/is_in_gamut>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/values>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/distance>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/lighten>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/darken>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/saturate>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/desaturate>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/tint>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/tone>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/shade>,
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/apply>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/set_value>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/add_value>,
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/mix>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/invert>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/complement>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/analogous>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/gradient>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/cluster>.
The I<values> method also expects I<in> as a positional argument if it
is the only one, since conversion into that space is the main purpose 
of that method.

=head2 by


L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/lighten>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/darken>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/saturate>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/desaturate>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/tint>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/tone>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/shade>,


=head2 to

This argument receives a second or target color. It may come in form of
another GTC object or a color definition that is acceptable to the
constructor. But it has to be a scalar (string or (HASH) reference),
not a value list or hash.

The following methods accept the I<to> argument:  
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/distance>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/mix>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/analogous>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/gradient>.



=head2 range

Every color space comes with range definitions for its values.
For instance I<red>, I<green> and I<blue> in I<RGB> go usually from zero
to 255 (0..255). In order to change that, many methods accept the named
argument C<range>. When only one integer value is provided, it changes the
upper bound on all three axis and as lower bound is assumed zero.
Let's say you need I<RGB16> values with a range of 0 .. 65536,
then you type C<< range => 65536 >> or C<< range => 2**16 >>.

If you provide an ARRAY ref you can change the upper bounds of all axis
individually and in order to change even the lower boundaries, use ARRAY
refs even inside that. For instance in C<HSL> the C<hue> is normally
0 .. 359 and the other two axis are 0 .. 100. In order to set C<hue>
to -100 .. 100 but keep the other two untouched you would have to insert:
C<< range => [[-100,100],100,100] >>.

The following methods accept the I<range> argument: 
L<new|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Constructor>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/values>,
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/is_in_gamut>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/distance>.


=head2 raw

I<raw> expects a perlish pseudo boolean (0 or 1). When set to true,
GTC will not change the color values even if they are out of L</range>.
Values on angular axes might still get put into range, because a rotation
of 360 degrees is no change in mathematical-geometric meaning.

I<raw> is set off (false) by default for IO methods, because this is usually
the expected behaviour by the user and by the calculation methods. They might
create unexpected results when getting fed out of gamut colors as input.
Here it is mostly useful in debugging scenarios.

I<raw> is set on (true) by default at the I<is_in_gamut> method, because 
in most cases it does not make sense to clamp a color into gamut and then
ask if it is in gamut, which would be always true. However - it can be 
useful to set it there to false in combination with the L</in> argument. 
It can be a valid question to ask if a color, 
that got clamped into range in its original space, gets out of gamut
when converted into another space.

The I<raw> argument can be used in:
L<new|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Constructor>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/values>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/is_in_gamut>.


=head2 steps

L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/complement>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/analogous>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/gradient>, 



=head2 tilt

L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/complement>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/analogous>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set/gradient>, 


=head2 only

L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/distance>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation/invert>


=head2 from

L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/name>, 
L<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/closest_name>.



=head1 AUTHOR

Herbert Breunung, <lichtkind@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 Herbert Breunung.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

Color definitions contain either the name of a space or the names
of its axis (long or short). If the space name or its alias is used,
the values have to be provided in the same order as the axis described here.

Color space or axis names may be written in any combination of upper and
lower case characters, but I recommend using the spelling presented here.
Each axis has also two specific names, one long and one short, which are
in rare cases equal. To define a color according to a space you need
to provide for each axis one value, that is inside the required value
range and of a specified type (int or real with amount of decimals).
