=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Calculation - reference of single color calculation methods

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This L<manual|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual> page contains the most
detailed description of the fourteen methods that produce a GTC color object
which in some fashion is related to the current one (caller): 
L</lighten>, L</darken>, L</saturate>, L</desaturate>,
L</tint>, L</tone>, L</shade>,      L</lightness>, L</saturation>,
L</tone_curve>, L</derive>, L</random>, L</mix> and L</invert>.
That allows for method chaining like:

    $color->derive( set => {saturation => 5} )->invert->mix( to => 'green' );

Every L<argument|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument> and important 
argument combination will be explained in the dedicated chapter of a
method, but the first few paragraphs will explicate subject matters that
all methods have in common, like the fact that they trigger an
L<error|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Error> if arguments are not used
as described here.


=head1 METHODS

The thirteen methods can be divided into several groups, just by looking
at their signature. The first seven methods: L</lighten>, L</darken>, 
L</saturate>, L</desaturate>, L</tint>, L</tone> and L</shade>
just accept the named arguments 
L<by|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/by> (0..1),
L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in> (color space) and 
L<raw|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/raw> (pseudo bool),
the first one being the only required and default argument. 
The next two methods: L</lightness>, L</saturation> 
accept these three arguments too but also additionally 
L<set|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/set> and 
L<multiply|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/multiply>.
Here C<set> is the default argument but nothing is required.
Furthermore C<by> can be aliased with C<add> and instead of C<multiply> 
one might use the shorter C<x>.
L</derive> is works very similar but takes additionally a
L<range|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/range> definition
and C<set>, C<multiply> and C<add> can receive incomplete color definitions
in the L<hash format|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Format/hash>.
The last four methods: L</tone_curve>, L</random>, L</mix> and L</invert> 
have individual signatures.

All methods accept the L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in>
argument, which will default to L<OKHSL|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/OKHSL>
except L</mix> (L<OKLAB|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/OKLAB>)
and L</tone_curve> (L<LinearRGB|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/LinearRGB>).
The selection of color spaces is restricted for some methods, that rely
on the existence of an axis with a certain 
L<role|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/FAMILY>. L</lighten>, L</darken>
and L</lightness> need a I<lightness> axis (present in 
L<LAB|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/LAB-family> and 
L<HSL|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/HSL-family> spaces)
and L</saturate>, L</desaturate> and L</saturation> need a I<saturation> axis
(present in L<HSL|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/HSL-family> and 
L<HSV|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/HSV-family> spaces). 
And yes L</invert> works even in cylindrical spaces.

All methods accept also L<raw|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/raw>,
which defaults to false (0). As a consequence the result of an operation
will be always a color within default range of the selected color space.
Change this value to true (1) to allow out of range colors.


=head2 lighten 

C<lighten> produces a brighter color than the given one, unless you pass
a negative value via the C<by> argument. That value is interpreted as 
percentages on an absolute scale from 0 to 1.
Let's assume the given color is a mid blue which has a lightness that
is 46% of the maximum I<lightness>. Calling:

  $midblue->lighten( 0.13 );
  $midblue->lighten( by => 0.13 );                          # same result
  $midblue->lighten( by => 0.13, in => 'OKHSL' );           # also the same
  $midblue->lighten( by => 0.13, in => 'OKHSL', raw => 0 ); # no change yet
  
produces a color with a lightness that is 59% (46 + 13) of the maximum
value (100%). If the resulting lightness would be above 100% or below
0% it will be clamped into that range (it can not exceed I<black> or I<white>,
if C<raw> is set to false, which is the default).

=head2 darken

C<darken> works exactly like C<lighten>, just in the opposite direction,
producing a darker color unless a negative C<by> value is passed.
This method is not strictly necessary but helps API expressivity.

  $midblue->darken( -0.13 );                        # still the same

=head2 saturate

C<saturate> produces a more saturated, more colorful color. If the amount
is negative the colorfulness is decreased. Again, the value provided by 
the C<by> argument is understood as a percentage added on an absolute 
scale that gets clamped into range, unless C<raw> is manually set to 1 (true).

  $midblue->saturate( by => 0.13);                  # saturate in OKHSL
  $midblue->saturate( by => 0.13, in => 'HSL' );    # saturate in HSL

=head2 desaturate

C<desaturate> is the antagonist of C<saturate> like C<darken> is the
opposite of C<lighten>.

  $midblue->desaturate( by => -0.13, in => 'HSL' ); # same as above

=head2 tint

C<tint> produces a color that is a mix between white and the current color.
The argument C<by> states how much percentage white has in the mix.
Values above 1 have the same result as 1: a pure white and values of zero
and below will return the same color as the calling object holds.
The new color has increased lightness and decreased saturation.

  $midblue->tint( 0.13 );
  $midblue->tint( by => 0.13, in => 'RGB' );        # different result

=head2 tone

C<tone> produces a color that is a mix between mid grey and the current color.
Mid grey is a 1:1 mix between white and black. Values above 1 have the 
same result as 1: mid grey and values of zero and below will return the
same color as the calling object holds.
The new color has increased or decreased lightness and decreased saturation.

=head2 shade

C<shade> produces a color that is a mix between the current color and black.
Values above 1 have the same result as 1: full black and values of zero
and below will return the same color as the calling object holds
(unless C<raw> is set to true).
The new color has decreased lightness and decreased saturation.


=head2 lightness

C<lightness>

=head2 saturation

C<saturation>


=head2 derive

C<derive>



=head2 tone_curve

C<tone_curve> calculates a gamma correction, which is just a power function on
normalized color values (range 0 .. 1). Gamma is in this context the name 
of a variable that contains the power. (C<$value = $value ** $gamma;>)
The method expects two named arguments: C<gamma> and C<in>. The first one
is required and second one is optional. There is no rule that allows for
a lone positional argument.

C<gamma> has to be either a floating point number or a HASH reference
that contains a gamma value per axis. Long or short axis names can be used
as keys. A gamma correction is reversed with the same function, 
just with an inverted gamma value (C<1 / $gamma>). Even if some 
implementations apply the inverted gamma, GTC uses the gamma value as given,
to not further complicate things because there is no I<'invert'> argument.
Just prepend the C<gamma> with C<< 1 / >>.

L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in> sets the color space
the values will be first converted to. Then these values will be normalized,
before the gamma value is applied. C<in> defaults to 
L<LinearRGB|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/LinearRGB>
since this is the default IO space with gamma removed, ready for a custom
gamma correction. Applying gamma makes only sense in Euclidean spaces 
with the origin in one corner of the space like I<RGB> or I<CIEXYZ>.
These are with minor exceptions only the spaces from the 
L<RGB|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space/RGB> family, since even 
I<LAB> type spaces do not fit. They are Euclidean, but their origin is not
in one corner but the center of one face.

    my $linear_blue = $blue->tone_curve( gamma => 2.2 );         # is the same as :
    my $linear_blue = $blue->tone_curve( gamma => {r => 2.2, g =>2.2, b => 2.2}, in => 'LinearRGB' );


=head2 random

C<random>


=head2 set_value

C<set_value> creates a new GTC color object that shares some values with
the current one, but differs in others. It is NOT a setter, since it
doesn't change the values of the calling object. The replaced values are 
provided as absolute numbers with their associated axis names (long or short).
The named arguments have to be axis names of one 
L<color space|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space>. 
If that is too ambiguous, you may add the named argument 
L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in> to specify the space by name.
This space defines the acceptable value ranges.
If the resulting color will be outside those ranges, 
the values will be clamped so it will become a regular (in range) color.
A mix of axis names from different spaces or a lack of any axis name as
argument will result in an L<error|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Error> message.


    my $blue = $black->set_value( blue => 255 );                   # same as #0000ff
    # setting saturation in OKHSL (due to internal search order)
    my $pale_blue = $blue->set_value( saturation => 50 );          # $c->( s => 50) works too
    my $color = $blue->set_value( saturation => 50, in => 'HSV' ); # now in HSV


=head2 add_value

C<add_value> creates a new GTC color object that shares some values with 
the current one, but differs in others. It does NOT alter the values of 
the calling object (invocant). The arguments work exactly as described
in L</set_value>. The only difference is that a new value is not the given,
but the sum of the old one and the given. C<add_value> calculates values
in the default ranges of the given color space, whereas lightweight methods 
like L</lighten> add percentages (a normalized value).


    my $blue = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new('blue');
    my $darkblue = $blue->add_value( Lightness => -25 );    # get a darker tone
    my $blue2 = $blue->add_value( blue => 10 );             # bluer than blue ?
    my $blue3 = $blue->add_value( l => 10, in => 'LAB' );   # lighter color according to CIELAB


=head2 mix

C<mix> creates a new color, that has the average values between the calling
object and another color (or several colors). It accepts four named
arguments: C<to>, C<by>, C<raw> and C<in>, but only the first one is required 
and can be also provided as the only positional argument. For compatibility
C<amount> can be used as an alias for C<by>.

The L<to|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/to> argument works 
like in other methods, with the exception that it also accepts an ARRAY
ref (square brackets) with several color definitions or GTC color objects.

L<by|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/by> designates the mix amount
of the other color(s) (C<to>) in percent.
A value of 0.2 means that the other color or any of the other colors gets 20%.
The calling color receives whatever is left percentage wise, which might be nothing. 
Per default C<mix> computes a 50-50 (1:1 or 0.5-0.5) mix between all involved colors.
If C<to> has several colors assigned, then also C<by> might receive an ARRAY
reference with several percentage values that have to be provided in the same
order as the colors. If the sum of the percentage values exceeds one (100%)
then only the ratio between the other colors gets preserved and the caller
gets overlooked.

L<raw|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/raw> defaults to false,
which allows C<mix> to clamp the result values into range. C<mix> can 
only create an out of range color if some of the input color(s) are 
already out of range.

L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in> sets the color space
the values will be mixed in, which is per default I<OKLAB>.


    $blue->mix( $silver );                                     # 50% silver, 50% blue
    $blue->mix( to => 'silver',           by =>  .6 );         # 60% silver, 40% blue
    $blue->mix( to => [qw/silver green/], by => [.1, .2]);     # 10% silver, 20% green, 70% blue
    $blue->mix( to => [qw/silver green/], by => [.3, .9]);     # 25% silver, 75% green,  0% blue
    $blue->mix( to => [qw/silver green/], by =>  .3);          # 30% silver, 30% green, 40% blue
    $blue->mix( to => [qw/silver green/] );                    # 33% silver, 33% green, 33% blue
    $blue->mix( to => {H => 120, S =>100, L => 50}, in => 'HSV' ); # teal =  50% green, 50% blue
    # the other color in the last example was defined in HSL but mixed in HSV


=head2 invert

C<invert> computes a new color, where all or some values are inverted 
according to the ranges of the chosen color space. To invert means in
a Euclidean space that the value has after the operation the same
absolute difference to the maximal value as it had before the operation to
the minimal value. On an angular axis it is a rotation of 180 degrees,
which means adding half the maximum. The method accepts three named 
arguments: C<only>, C<raw> and C<in>. The first one can be provided as a 
positional argument if it is the only one.

L<only|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/only> restricts the
operation to the axes named by C<only> (long or short axis name). 
You may provide several axis names within an ARRAY reference, as long
they belong to one color space. The default is to invert all values of a color.

L<raw|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/raw> defaults to false,
which allows C<invert> to clamp values into range. C<invert> can only create
out of range colors if C<raw> is set to true(1) and the input (given color)
is already out of range.

L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in> sets the color space
the values will be inverted in, which is per default I<OKHSL>. But please
note that the method tries to get hints from the C<only> argument in order
to determine the color space. There will be an 
L<error|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Error>
if the axis names provided by C<only> do not match the space given by C<in>.

    my $black = $white->invert();                      # to state the obvious
    my $gray = $gray50->invert();                      # changed nothing
    my $blue = $yellow->invert( in => 'LUV' );         # invert in LUV space
    $color->invert( 'red' );                           # invert only red value
    $color->invert( only => 'red' );                   # same but explicit
    $yellow->invert( in => 'HSL', only => 'hue' );     # same result as $yellow->complement();
    $yellow->invert( in => 'HSL', only => [qw/s l/] ); # invert only saturation and lightness


=head1 AUTHOR

Herbert Breunung, <lichtkind@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 Herbert Breunung.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
