=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Constructor - 

=head1 INTRODUCTION

There are many ways to create a color object. In short you can either
use the name of a constant (see L</name>) or provide values, which are
coordinates in one of several
L<color spaces|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space::Hub/COLOR-SPACES>.
The latter are also understood in many
L<formats|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space::Hub/FORMATS>.
From now on any input that the constructor method C<new> accepts,
is called a B<color definition>.


=head2 new({ r => $r, g => $g, b => $b })

Most clear, flexible and longest input format: a hash with long or short
axis names as keys with fitting values. This can be C<red>, C<green> and
C<blue> or C<r>, C<g> and C<b> or names from any other color space.
Upper or lower case doesn't matter.

    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( r => 255, g => 0, b => 0 );
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new({r => 255, g => 0, b => 0}); # works too
                          ... ->new( Red => 255, Green => 0, Blue => 0); # also fine
              ... ->new( Hue => 0, Saturation => 100, Lightness => 50 ); # same color
                  ... ->new( Hue => 0, whiteness => 0, blackness => 0 ); # still the same


=head2 new( [$r, $g, $b] )

takes a triplet of integer I<RGB> values (red, green and blue : 0 .. 255).
They can, but don't have to be put into an ARRAY reference (square brackets).
If you want to define a color by values from another color space,
you have to prepend the values with the name of a supported color space.
Out of range (gamut) values will be corrected (clamped).

    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(          255, 0, 0 );
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(         [255, 0, 0]);   # does the same
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( 'RGB',   255, 0, 0 );   # named list syntax
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(  RGB =>  255, 0, 0 );   # with fat comma
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new([ RGB =>  255, 0, 0]);   # named ARRAY
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(  RGB => [255, 0, 0]);   # separate name and values
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new([ RGB => [255, 0, 0]]);  # even inside an ARRAY
    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(  YUV => .299,-0.168736, .5); # same color in YUV


=head2 new('rgb($r,$g,$b)')

String format that is supported by CSS (I<css_string> format): it starts
with the case insensitive color space name (lower case is default),
followed by the (optionally) comma separated values in round braces.
The value suffixes that are defined by the color space (I<'%'> in case
of I<HSV>) are optional.

    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(  'rgb(255 0 0)' );         # comma optional
    my $blue = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( 'hsv(240, 100%, 100%)' );
    my $blue = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( 'hsv(240, 100, 100)' );   # works too


=head2 new('rgb: $r, $g, $b')

String format I<named_string> (good for serialisation) that maximizes
readability. Here are commas not optional, but space name is still case
insensitive.

    my $red = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new(  'rgb: 255, 0, 0' );
    my $blue = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( 'HSV: 240, 100, 100' );


=head2 new('#rgb')

Color definitions in hexadecimal format as widely used in the web, are
also acceptable (I<RGB> only).

    my $color = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new('#FF0000');
    my $color = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new('#f00');    # short version


=head2 new('name')

Get a color object by providing a name from the X11, HTML (CSS) or SVG
scheme or a Pantone report. UPPER or CamelCase will be normalized to
lower case and inserted underscore letters ('_') will be ignored as perl
does in numbers (1_000 == 1000). All available names are listed
L<here | Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Name::Constant/NAMES>.

    my $color = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new('Emerald');
    my @names = Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Name::all(); # select from these


=head2 new('scheme:color')

Get a color by name from a specific scheme or standard as provided by an
external module L<Graphics::ColorNames>::* , which has to be installed
separately or with L<Bundle::Graphics::ColorNames>.
See all scheme names L<here|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Name/SCHEMES>.
The color name will be normalized as described above.

    my $color = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new('SVG:green');
    my @schemes = Graphics::ColorNames::all_schemes();    # list installed schemes


=head2 new( color => .., range => .., raw => ..)

In the rare occasion you are given a color definition with values in a 
none standard range, you will need a mechanism to tell GTC what ranges
to use when reading the color definition. This is also important in 
combination with wider gamut spaces such as I<ProPhotoRGB> that use either
normalized values or several huge none standard ranges, in order to get
a similar resolution for the normal colors as stadard RGB.

Just use the named argument I<color> and give it a scalar color definition
as described above. The second argument that can be L</range>.

    my $color = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( 
                 color => [AppleRGB => [1438, 374, 8285]], range => 2**32
    );
    
The second reason to use the B<color> argument is to combine it with B<raw>.
Then the values will be not be clamped into range, taken as is.
You might want to use the argument I<raw> also on the method I<values>.
This is the only way to calculate with imaginary colors.
But please note this might cause some functions not to work as intended.

    my $color = Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( 
                 color => {r => 0, g => 0, b => 256}, raw => 1
    );


=head2 color

If writing

    Graphics::Toolkit::Color->new( ...);

is too much typing work for you or takes up too much space in the code file,
import the subroutine C<color>, which accepts all the same arguments as C<new>.

    use Graphics::Toolkit::Color qw/color/;
    my $green = color('green');
    my $darkblue = color([20, 20, 250]);

=head1 AUTHOR

Herbert Breunung, <lichtkind@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 Herbert Breunung.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

