=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Cookbook - examples that solve practical issues

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This L<manual|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual> page answers practical 
problems with multi line code examples and their detailed explanation
with some added background knowledge.
This is complementary to the reference pages that contain only one line
examples that showcase a single method or argument.

=head1 RECIPES

=head2 How to convert color values?

GTC has no dedicated converter methods because of two reasons. For one,
it supports 33 color spaces and growing and 33 * 32 = 1056 methods would
be impractical. But abstracting color spaces away makes GTC methods also
much more powerful, when they can be performed in any or at least many spaces.
This is why you simply read and write with GTC color definitions and
the conversion will happen implicitly. Color definitions are read by the
L<constructor|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Constructor>
and values are written by the method 
L<values|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Getter/values>. Read the next
recipe if you want to convert from and into color names.

The two most important arguments of C<values> for conversions are
L<in|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Argument/in> and C<as>.
C<in> selects the color space the color gets converted to.
(Read all about color spaces L<here|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Space>.)
C<as> allows to select one of the many formats, which are explained 
L<here|Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Format>. This makes the conversion
of an ordinary CSS color look like:

  use Graphics::Toolkit::Color qw/color/;
  my $okhsl = color('rgb(34, 56, 123)')->values( in => 'OKHSL', as => 'css_string');



=head2 How to translate a CSS color name into values and back?

=head2 How to get a split complementary palette?

=head2 How to get a monochrome palette?


=head1 AUTHOR

Herbert Breunung, <lichtkind@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 Herbert Breunung.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
