=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Philosophy - GTC design principles


=head1 SYNOPSIS

This document explains the goals and principles GTC was designed with. 
This encompasses the functionality, API, architecture, coding style and
technical decisions.


=head1 GOAL

GTC is a comprehensive library on the topic of color calculations and 
conversion.
It aims to be an all-in-one solution for designers and programmers,
who create computer graphics, especially at runtime.
Its primary goal is to enable an intuitive expression of intent
and to make the path to desired color definition(s) as easy as possible.
It tries to offer as much useful functionality as possible without getting 
bloated or overengineered. It also aims to avoid opposition to industry
or scientific standards, as long as it doesn't lead to impracticalities.


=head1 HISTORY

GTC started as a supporting library for modules like L<Chart> and the many
siblings of L<App::GUI::Harmonograph>. In that role it had to translate 
color names, power a complex color picker and calculate gradients and complements.
But during its first iteration other goals were added, like technical
excellence, clean code and a testbed for a certain architectural style 
without inheritance.
Ultimately it is just driven by personal preferences, which also developed
while progressing from version to version.

=head1 FUNCTIONALITY

It is important to divide the featureset into three categories: IO,
adapt colors and color set creation.

In order to make the usage of GTC "as easy as possible" it has to understand
and interoperate with relevant formats, color spaces and color names:
To recite the old documentation: Humans access colors at hardware level
(eye) in I<RGB>, at cognition level in I<HSL> or I<LAB> (brain) and at
the cultural level (language) with names.
With all these options available you can express easily and intuitively
with which color to start. And with a wealth of functions that understand
lots of arguments you can arrive at the desired color (palette) quickly.
On top of that, GTC has mechanisms to accommodate formatting oddities like
custom value suffixes, custom number formats or custom translations 
into numeric values. Moreover color values can be recalculated from and to 
custom value ranges and are also allowed to be outside of expected ranges.

The second category is about measuring colors  and color differences 
and tweak colors accordingly.

=head1 API 

The GTC API tells that there are two driving forces that shape the API. Firstly
it has to be memorable. That means a small API (few keywords). That 
means also consistent (reuse of the key words) and using where possible 
plain English or established terms of the trade. The second driving
force is to find the right abstractions so that the semantic components 
are all optional and combinable. That way the user can take what he needs

The convenience we strive for is then just a byproduct.

few methods as possible with a lot of functionality
lots of arguments
argument reuse
memory footprint


Immutable data

=head1 ARCHITECTURE

The GTC architecture observes just three simple principles.

=over 4

=item *

Files should be small enough to be roughly understood in one glance,
which I would spell out to 100 - 300 lines of code. Only the main file
due to its special function has without documentation 400+ lines.
This tendency to smaller units of functionality amplifies the formation
of groups of packages that are about one topic (like color name handling)
and that populate one common namespace (such as C<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Name>).
These subsystems can be procedural or object oriented.
If procedural, then members build on top of each other
(C<GTC::Name> uses C<GTC::Name::Scheme> uses C<GTC::Name::Constant>). 
And if it is object oriented, then instances of member classes 
(C<GTC::Space::Basis>, C<GTC::Space::Shape>, C<GTC::Space::Format>)
are fat attributes of the main class of the subsystem
(C<Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Space>).

=item *

Perhaps the most important principle is encapsulation: hiding complexity
and providing useful features behind a simplified API. This will happen
in a three tier way. First routines/methods do encapsulate complexity,
then packages and lastly subsystems, although some subsystems consist
of only one or two files.

=item *

As hinted, there is a strict ordering inside a subsystem and 
routines/methods are only allowed to call others from same package
or lower. The same is true about subsystems, which are also ordered.
A routine may call into a subsystem several layers deeper, but never
into a subsystem above. This is why the utility functions sit at the 
bottom of the hierarchy.

=back

The lowest subsystem is C<GTC::Space>, which abstracts away
all differences between color spaces that can be handled uniformly.
It also makes adding new spaces easy, since a color space instance is
just 4 - 8 declarative statements plus the extra code for the
converter and sometimes formatter.

Above sits the C<GTC::Space::Hub>, which holds all color space objects
and is involved in all tasks where the right space has to be selected or
where knowledge about the relation between spaces is needed like in conversion.

Above the Hub and C<GTC::Name> is C<GTC::Values> which represents one
color independent of a color space.

Still higher is located the color computation in C<GTC::Calculator> and
C<GTC::SetCalculator>.

At the top has to sit C<Graphics::Toolkit::Color>, since it is public API.

=head1 CODE STYLE

# signatures
simple minimal
top down
ddd
consistent names

=head1 AUTHOR

Herbert Breunung, <lichtkind@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 Herbert Breunung.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut

