=pod

=head1 NAME

Graphics::Toolkit::Color::Manual::Set - color set creation methods

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=head1 INTRODUCTION

=head1 METHODS

construct several interrelated color objects at once.

=head2 complement

Creates a set of complementary colors (GTC objects), which will be
computed in I<HSL> color space. The method accepts three optional,
named arguments: C<steps> and C<tilt> and C<target>. But if none are
provided, THE (one) complementary color will be produced.

One singular, positional argument defines the number of produced colors,
same as the named argument C<steps> would have. If you want to get
'triadic' colors, choose 3 as an argument for C<steps> - 4 would get
you the 'quadratic' colors, .... and so on. The given color is always
the last in the row of produced complementary colors.

If you need split-complementary colors, just use the C<tilt> argument,
which defaults to zero. Without any tilt, complementary colors are equally
distanced dots on a horizontal circle around the vertical, central column
in I<HSL> space. In other words: complementary colors have all the same
'saturation' (distance from the column) and 'lightness' (height).
They differ only in 'hue' (position on the circle). The given color
and its (THE) complement sit on opposite sides of the circle.
The greater the C<tilt> amount, the more these colors (minus the given
one) will move on the circle toward THE complement and vice versa.
What is traditionally meant by split-complementary colors you will
get here with a C<tilt> factor of around 3.42 and three C<steps> or
a C<tilt> of 1.585 and four C<steps> (depending on if you need
THE complement also in your set).

To get an even greater variety of complementary colors, you can use
C<target> argument and move around THE complement and thus shape the
circle in all three directions. C<hue> (or C<h>) values move it
circularly C<saturation> (or C<s>) move it away or negative values toward
the central column and C<lightness> (or C<l>) move it up and down.

    my @colors = $c->complement( 4 );                       # 'quadratic' colors
    my @colors = $c->complement( steps => 4, tilt => 4 );   # split-complementary colors
    my @colors = $c->complement( steps => 3, tilt => 2, target => { l => -10 } );
    my @colors = $c->complement( steps => 3, tilt => 2, target => { h => 20, s=> -5, l => -10 });


=head2 gradient

Creates a gradient (a list of color objects that build a transition)
between the current color held by the object and a second color,
provided by the named argument L</to>, which is  required.
Optionally C<to> accepts an ARRAY ref (square braces) with a list of
colors in order to create the most fancy, custom and nonlinear gradients.

Also required is the named argument C<steps>, which is the gradient length
or count of colors, which are part of this gradient. Included in there
are the start color (given by this object) and end color (given with C<to>).

The optional, floating point valued argument C<tilt> makes the gradient
skewed toward one or the other end. Default is zero, which results in
a linear, uniform transition between start and stop.
Greater values of the argument let the color change rate start small,
steadily getting bigger. Negative values work vice versa.
The bigger the absolute numeric value the bigger the effect. Please have
in mind that values over 2 result is a very strong tilt.

Optional is the named argument L</in> (color space - details behind link).
Tip: use C<oklab> and C<cieluv> spaces for visually smooth gradients.

    # we turn to grey
    my @colors = $c->gradient( to => $grey, steps => 5);
    # none linear gradient in HSL space :
    @colors = $c1->gradient( to =>[14,10,222], steps => 10, tilt => 1, in => 'HSL' );
    @colors = $c1->gradient( to =>['blue', 'brown', {h => 30, s => 44, l => 50}] );


=head2 cluster

Computes a set of colors that are all similar but not the same.
The method accepts three named arguments: C<radius>, C<minimal_distance>
and L</in>, of which the first two are required.

The produced colors form a ball or cuboid in a color space around the given
color, depending on what the argument C<radius> got. If it is a single
number, it will be a ball with the given radius. If it is an ARRAY of
values you get the a cuboid with the given dimensions.

The minimal distance between any two colors of a cluster is set by the
C<minimal_distance> argument, which is computed the same way as the method
C<minimal_distance>, it has a short alias C<min_d>. In a cuboid shaped cluster,
colors will form a cubic grid - inside the ball shaped cluster they
form a cuboctahedral grid, which is packed tighter, but still obeys the
minimal distance.

    my @blues = $blue->cluster( radius => 4, minimal_distance => 0.3 );
    my @c = $color->cluster( r => [2,2,3], min_d => 0.4, in => YUV );

=head1 AUTHOR

Herbert Breunung, <lichtkind@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2026 Herbert Breunung.

=head1 LICENSE

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
